---
title: <Climate claims assignment: Climate communication discrepancies>
layout: default
nav_order: 1
---

  # Climate claims assignment: Climate communication discrepancies
  Aoife Hawthorne<br>
  ISCI3A12-A<br>
  24 October, 2021<br>
  
  The article that I have chosen to provide commentary on is by the Everything Climate website. Entitled The Global Temperature Record Says We Are in a ‘Climate Emergency’, the article asserts that the media tends to place more emphasis on the climate crisis by using catchy headlines and ambiguous claims. The article discusses how there is an extremely popular and highly-cited graph from NASA that shows an “alarming” trend in the rise of the estimated global mean temperatures (Everything Climate, 2021). Further, it mentions that the term “climate crisis” is used almost as a catch-all term for anything to do with climate change, which pushes the public to believe in it. The article talks about how a lot of climate change data is visually misleading in order to cause panic in people. A specific example of this is through the use of another NASA GISS Global Land-Ocean Temperature Anomaly Index from 1880 to present. To somebody who doesn’t follow climate change science or data, or somebody who doesn’t have a science background, they may view this data for what it is and will panic. The article takes the data and changes the chart format by taking the absolute value of each data point and plotting it, effectively “flattening the curve” and portraying a less dire view of climate change.<br>
This article cites NASA for not only its images, but for quantifiable climate data as well. They provided the URLs to some of the NASA data and upon looking into those URLs, the data was last updated in 2019, which is fairly recent, considering the content consists of definitions and general information and not “current” statistics. One thing I would question is the permanency of the URL. As a researcher, I have always learned to find the DOI of an article or journal and include that as a reference as opposed to the raw URL as the DOI is permanent. Why don’t such links exist for government websites like NASA? Moving forward, the article discusses data manipulation and how easy it is, citing a site called *Towards Data Science*, run by Will Koehrsen. Koehrsen stresses the importance of data literacy and data science communication. Upon further research, I discovered that Koehrsen is a Data Scientist at Cortex Intel and specializes in data communication.<br>
Given that the main claim of the article is that climate change data is often depicted as more dire than it really is, I looked to see if that was consistent with the literature. I asked Google, “Is there really a climate crisis?” and here’s what I found: the Earth is warming, and the changes are coming (Introcaso, 2018). Introcaso does not employ the use of images or data collections, though they do discuss multiple aspects of climate health - severe storms, rising seas, and drought and fires - to name a few (2018). I also came across a journal that emphasizes the importance of climate communication and science communication in general. It touches, in particular, on the variety of media outlets available to the average citizen and how there are disparities between different sources of information. Where people get their information from can inform the ways in which they understand the world around them. As such can be seen by the tie between Fox News and Republican citizens (Stecula and Merkley, 2019). The article notes that public belief is typically directly tied to the beliefs of those with elite powers (Stecula and Merkley, 2019). From this, I can extrapolate that governments might control how they portray their climate data because it influences where their funds go. This background research was important to embark on because it helps to paint a better picture of the climate emergency, as well as offer different perspectives on the issue.<br><br>

<b>Works cited</b><br>
Everything Climate, 2021. The global temperature record says we are in a ‘climate emergency’. Available at: <https://everythingclimate.org/the-global-temperature-record-says-we-are-in-a-climate-emergency/> [Accessed on: 20 October, 2021]<br>
Introcaso, D., 2018. Climate change is the greatest threat to human health in history. *Health Affairs Blog*. Available at: <10.1377/hblog20181218.278288> [Accessed on: 20 October, 2021]<br>
Koehrsen, W., 2021. About. Available at: <https://williamkoehrsen.medium.com/about> [Accessed on 21 October, 2021]<br>
NASA, 2019. GISS surface temperature analysis: The elusive absolute surface air temperature (SAT). Available at: <https://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/faq/abs_temp.html> [Accessed on: 21 October, 2021]<br>
Stecula, D. A., Merkley, E., 2019. Framing climate change: economics, ideology, and uncertainty in American news media content from 1988 to 2014. *Frontiers in Communication*. (4). Available at: <https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2019.00006> [Accessed on: 21 October, 2021]

  
